<!-- image-->  
Figure 14. Net increase in plate 23 thickness along longitudinal mid-plane at EOL with 95% UCL of swelling correlation including AFIP-6 MKII data and various values of creep rate coefficient (× 10−25 cm3 /MPa-fission).

Since the net maximum increase in the thickness of plate 23 in the MURR LEU fuel element represents the most important outcome from this study, the value of the maximum increase in the plate thickness at EOL across all combinations of fuel swelling correlations and creep rate coefficients are listed in Table 4. Based on the FEA results, the maximum increase in the plate 23 thickness is 0.083 mm and it occurs when fuel swelling is described by the 95% UCL of swelling correlation including AFIP-6 MKII data and creep rate coefficient in the range between 7500 and 250 $( \times 1 0 ^ { - 2 5 }$ cm3 /MPa-fission).

Table 4: Maximum increase in the thickness of plate 23 at EOL under different combinations of swelling correlations and creep rate coefficients $( \times 1 0 ^ { - 2 5 }$ cm3 /MPa-fission).
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>Maximum increase in plate thickness, mm</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Swelling correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1> $\mathrm { A } = 7 5 0$ </td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1> $\mathrm { A } = 5 0 0$ </td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1> $\mathrm { A } = 2 5 0$ </td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1> $\mathrm { A } = 5$ </td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Kim swelling correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.051</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.051</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.051</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.050</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Excluding AFIP-6 MKII correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.055</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.055</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.055</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.054</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>95% UCL including AFIP-6 MKII correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.083</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.083</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.083</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0.081</td></tr></table>

## 3.4 Stress analysis

Table 5 lists the peak equivalent stress experienced by the U-10Mo fuel core under the various combinations of fuel swelling correlations and creep rate coefficient values simulated in this work. It can be seen that the decrease in creep rate coefficient from 250 to $5 \ : ( \times 1 0 ^ { - 2 5 }$ cm3 /MPa-fission) resulted in a noticeable increase in the peak equivalent stress of the fuel core. This is attributed to the lack of stress relaxation mechanisms in the case of such a very low creep rate coefficient.

Furthermore, the influence of the swelling correlation on the peak equivalent stress in the fuel core is noticeable only at the lowest creep rate coefficient attempted in this study. According to reference [10], the maximum operating temperature experienced by the U-10Mo fuel core is about $1 5 0 \mathrm { { } ^ { \circ } C }$ at which the yield stress of the material is 805 MPa [12]. In all the cases simulated in this work, the peak equivalent stress in the U-10Mo fuel core is well below the yield stress of the material. Thus, no plastic deformation occurred in the fuel core under any combination of fuel swelling correlation and creep rate coefficient values simulated in this work.

Table 5: Peak equivalent stress in U-10Mo fuel core.
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>Peak equivalent stress, MPa</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Swelling correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A = 750</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A=500</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A = 250</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>A= 5</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Kim swelling correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31.34</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31.54</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>32.34</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>243.40</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Excluding AFIP-6 MKII correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31.42</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31.64</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>32.79</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>262.67</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>95% UCL including AFIP-6 MKII correlation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31.34</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>31.20</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>32.70</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>342.54</td></tr></table>

## 4 Summary

In this work, FEA was used to evaluate the swelling and creep behavior of plate 23 in a MURR LEU U-10Mo fuel element. The thermo-mechanical behavior of plate 23 was simulated under typical irradiation conditions of the MURR LEU core. Fuel swelling was described considering three swelling correlations: the Kim swelling correlation, a swelling correlation excluding AFIP-6 MKII data, and the 95% upper confidence limit of the correlation including AFIP-6 MKII, where the last one represents an extreme case (most conservative estimate of fuel swelling). Furthermore, irradiation creep strain rate in the U-10Mo fuel was modeled such that it linearly varies with equivalent stress, fission rate and empirical creep rate coefficient.

The deformation profile and corresponding increase in the thickness of plate 23 at EOL were determined considering various combinations of the aforementioned three swelling correlations and creep rate coefficients of 750, 500, 250, and $5 ( \times 1 0 ^ { - 2 5 }$ cm3 /MPa-fission). The following remarks were made:

• Maximum displacement along the thickness direction of plate 23 was found at the same location in all simulated combinations of swelling correlations and creep rate coefficients.

• Under the same swelling correlation, larger outboard displacement was always observed at the lowest creep rate coefficient attempted in this study $( 5 \times 1 0 ^ { - 2 5 }$ cm3 /MPa-fission).

• Variation in the creep rate coefficnet has an insignificant effect on the net increase in plate thickness for the same swelling correlation.

• Maximum increase in plate thickness was found to be 0.083 mm and it occurs when fuel swelling is described by the 95% UCL of the correlation including AFIP-6 MKII data and creep rate coefficient in the range between 750 and 250 (× 10−25 cm3 /MPa-fission).

• Under any of the three swelling correlations considered in this work, the lack of stress relaxation mechanisms in the case of creep rate coefficient of $5 ~ ( \times 1 0 ^ { - 2 5 }$ cm3 /MPa-fission) resulted in a noticeable increase in the peak equivalent stress in the U-10Mo fuel core. However, the fuel core did not experience any plastic deformation since the peak equivalent stress in all cases was well below the yield stress of the material.

## 5 Acknowledgements

This work was sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Material Management and Minimization in the U.S. National Nuclear Security Agency Office of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Office under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.

## Appendix A

## Finite Element Meshing Profile Optimization and Analysis

Initially, the finite element (FE) geometrical model of plate 23 was prepared following a welloptimized fine-mesh profile that was previously used to model prototypic U-10Mo monolithic miniplates [14]. In that meshing profile, the U-Mo fuel core section was represented by six layers along the plate thickness direction, and each of the Zr diffusion barrier and the cladding sections was represented by three layers (on each side of the fuel core). However, due to the larger width and length of the MURR plate 23 relative to the dimensions of the mini-plates, the size of the input file representing the FE model for plate 23 was approximately 1 GB compared to few tens of MB for the corresponding monolithic mini-plate input file. Consequently, it was not possible to consider such a fine-mesh profile considering the available computational resources, as well as the extremely large size of the output database files.

The FE model of plate 23 was then meshed considering various combinations of the number of layers representing the three sections of the plate along the thickness direction. A coarse-mesh profile with the fuel core represented by two layers along the plate thickness directions and each of the Zr diffusion barrier and cladding section represented by one layer (on each side of the fuel core) resulted in a model input file of size ∼ 41 MB and output database file of ∼ 3.8 GB. The FE model with that meshing profile was considered as a full-size baseline model for plate 23.

A sub-modeling technique was used to determine the effect of variation in meshing profile on the displacement component along the plate thickness direction. A region of interest that envelopes the highest fission density in the fuel core (see Figure 2) around the transverse mid-section of plate 23 was determined and a FE sub-model was developed to represent that region as depicted by Figure 15. The region of interest was simulated in two cases corresponding to a total length of 6 inch (2 inch and 4 inch around plate 23 transverse mid-plane) and 10 inch (4 inch and 6 inch around plate 23 transverse mid-plane), separately.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 15. Schematic of the region of interest around the fuel core mid-section.

A fine mesh profile along the thickness direction of the plate was adopted for the region of interest. In the fine mesh profile, the fuel core section was represented by a total of six layers, the Zr diffusion barrier was represented by two layers (on each side of the fuel core), and the cladding section was represented by four layers (on each side of the fuel core). The purpose of this approach is to achieve results of high accuracy for the sub-model within reasonable computation time.

Two FE sub-models were developed for the region of interest shown in Figure 15 as follows: submodel (1): with X = 2 inch and Y = 4 inch (i.e. 6 inch length) and sub-model (2): with X = 4 inch and Y = 6 inch (i.e. 10 inch length). In the sub-modeling technique, the displacement data at all-time points from the coarse-mesh full-size model were used as boundary conditions for the fine-mesh submodels. Figure 16 shows contours of the displacement component along the thickness direction of plate 23 from the coarse-mesh full-size model and the two fine-mesh sub-models1.

<!-- image-->  
(a)

<!-- image-->  
(b)

<!-- image-->  
(c)  
Figure 16. Contours of displacement component along thickness directions of plate 23 from coarse-mesh full-size model (a) and fine-mesh profile sub-models measuring 6 inch (b) and 10 inch (c) in length.

The displacement peaks found at the edges of the two sub-models (Figure 16 b and c) are attributed to the truncation of the FE geometrical model at the edges of the region of interest which is commonly referred to as the edge effect. To exclude the edge effect, the displacement component along the plate thickness direction was reanalyzed in the two sub-models where the edge regions were excluded as shown in Figure 17.

<!-- image-->  
(a)

<!-- image-->  
(b)  
Figure 17. Contours of displacement component along thickness directions from (a) 6 inch and (b) 10 inch in length sub-models of plate 23 excluding the edge effect region in both cases.

It can be seen that the peak displacement along plate thickness in a 6 inch length sub-model is 0.290 mm (Figure 17a) whereas the corresponding peak displacement in the sub-model with a 10 inch length is 0.254 mm (Figure 17b). The larger displacement observed in the 6 inch sub-model can be attributed to residual edge effects compared to the 10 inch sub-model where the excluded edge effect regions are far enough from the sub-model mid-plane. Although both the 6 inch sub-model and 10 inch sub-model possess the same mesh profile, the 10 inch sub-model is affected less by the edge effect, and is thus considered more representative of the full size plate. Furthermore, the peak displacement along the plate thickness direction from the fine-mesh 10 inch length sub-model, following the exclusion of the edge effect regions, matches that of the coarse-mesh full-size model (see Figure 16a and Figure 17b). Because of the excellent agreement between the peak displacement predicted by the coarse-mesh full-size model of plate 23 and fine-mesh sub-model with a 10 inch length, the coarse-mesh full-size model of plate 23 was considered satisfactory for the analyses presented in this study.

## References

[1] J. L. Snelgrove, G. L. Hofman, M. K. Meyer, C. L. Trybus, and T. C. Wiencek, “Development of veryhigh-density low-enriched-uranium fuels,” Nucl. Eng. Des., vol. 178, pp. 119–126, 1997.

[2] M. K. Meyer et al., “IRRADIATION PERFORMANCE OF U-Mo MONOLITHIC FUEL,” Nucl. Eng. Technol., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 169–182, Apr. 2014.

[3] J. Rest, Y. S. Kim, G. L. Hofman, M. K. Meyer, and S. L. Hayes, “U-Mo Fuels Handbook, Version 1.0,” ANL-09/31, Argonne National Laboratory, 2006.

[4] E. H. Wilson, A. Bergeron, J. A. Stillman, T. A. Heltemes, D. Jaluvka, and L. Jamison, “U.S. HIGH PERFORMANCE RESEARCH REACTOR CONVERSION PROGRAM: AN OVERVIEW ON ELEMENT DESIGN,” RRFM 2017, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

[5] J. Stillman, “Technical Basis in Support of the Conversion of the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) Core from Highly-Enriched to Low-Enriched Uranium – Core Neutron Physics," ANL/RERTR/TM-12-30, Argonne National Laboratory, 2012.

[6] E. E. Feldman, “Technical Basis in Support of the Conversion of the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) Core from Highly-Enriched to Low-Enriched Uranium – Steady-State Thermal-Hydraulic Analysis," ANL/RERTR/TM-12-37, Argonne National Laboratory, 2012.

[7] J. Stillman, “Low-Enriched Uranium Conversion Preliminary Safety Analysis Report for the University of Missouri Research Reactor," University of Missouri Research Reactor, Columbia, MO, submitted to the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2017.

[8] Y. S. Kim and G. L. Hofman, “Fission product induced swelling of U–Mo alloy fuel,” J. Nucl. Mater., vol. 419, no. 1–3, pp. 291–301, Dec. 2011.

[9] G. L. Hofman and Y. S. Kim, “FISSION INDUCED SWELLING AND CREEP OF URANIUMMOLYBDENUM ALLOY FUEL,” RRFM 2009, Vienna , Austria.

[10] J. Stillman, E. Wislon, L. Foyto, K. Kutikkad, J. C. McKibben, and N. Peters, “Irradiation Demonstration Element Design Parameters for MURR LEU U-Mo Fuel Conversion," ANL/RTR/TM-18/4, Argonne National Laboratory, 2018.

[11] “ABAQUS/ CAE 6.14 Documentation Collection," Providence, RI: Dassault Systemes Simulia Corp., 2014.

[12] M. Meyer et al., “Preliminary Report on U-Mo Monolithic Fuel for Research Reactors," INL/EXT-17-40975, Revision 1, 2017.

[13] Y. S. Kim, G. L. Hofman, J. S. Cheon, A. B. Robinson, and D. M. Wachs, “Fission induced swelling and creep of U–Mo alloy fuel,” J. Nucl. Mater., vol. 437, no. 1–3, pp. 37–46, June 2013.

[14] W. Mohamed and H. S. Roh, “INFLUENCE OF MATERIALS PROPERTIES ON THE IRRADIATION BEHAVIOR OF U-10MO MONOLITHIC MINI-PLATES,” Proceedings of the ASME 2015 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition IMECE2015, 2015, no. 630, pp. 1–14.

Nuclear Science and Engineering Division

Argonne National Laboratory

9700 South Cass Avenue, Bldg. 208

Argonne, IL 60439

www.anl.gov