# Thermal stability of fission gas bubble superlattice in irradiated U–10Mo fuel

---

                                                                 Journal of Nuclear Materials 464 (2015) 1–5



                                                              Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                        Journal of Nuclear Materials
                                                 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnucmat




Thermal stability of fission gas bubble superlattice in irradiated
U–10Mo fuel
J. Gan ⇑, D.D. Keiser Jr., B.D. Miller, A.B. Robinson, D.M. Wachs, M.K. Meyer
Nuclear Fuels and Materials Division, Idaho National Laboratory, P.O. Box 1625, Idaho Falls, ID 83415-6188, USA




a r t i c l e        i n f o                           a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                       To investigate the thermal stability of the ﬁssion gas bubble superlattice, a key microstructural feature in
Received 5 January 2015                                both irradiated U–7Mo dispersion and U–10Mo monolithic fuel plates, a focused ion beam-transmission
Accepted 16 April 2015                                 electron microscopy (FIB-TEM) sample of irradiated U–10Mo fuel with a local ﬁssion density of
Available online 22 April 2015
                                                       3.5  1021 ﬁssions/cm3 was used for an in-situ heating TEM experiment. The temperature of the heating
                                                       holder was raised at a ramp rate of approximately 10 °C/min up to 700 °C, kept at that temperature for
                                                       about 34 min and further increased to 850 °C with a reduced rate of 5 °C/min. The result shows a high
                                                       thermal stability of the ﬁssion gas bubble superlattice. The implication of this observation on the fuel
                                                       microstructural evolution and performance under irradiation is discussed.
                                                                                                                         Ó 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction                                                                           bubble size and superlattice constant of 3.1 nm and 12 nm,
                                                                                          respectively. This is contradictory to the GBS found from noble
    The formation of a gas bubble superlattice (GBS) in metals                            gas ion irradiations where all the GBS have the same structure as
irradiated with gas ions has been investigated extensively by                             their host material. None of the current models can explain the
Johnson and others in the past [1–14]. The modeling efforts on                            development of an fcc GBS in a bcc host material.
the mechanisms of the development of self-organization nanos-                                 In the irradiated U–7Mo fuel, while the majority of the GBS col-
tructures as a result of irradiation are outlined by Ghoniem et al.                       lapses as the large bubbles become dominant at the high ﬁssion
[15]. GBS formations are reported in body-center-cubic (bcc),                             density of 5.2  1021 ﬁssions/cm3 as a result of grain subdivision,
face-center-cubic (fcc), and hexagonal metals irradiated with noble                       remnant GBS is still present, with an average bubble size and
gas helium, neon, and krypton ions. The degree of ordering varies                         superlattice constant of 3.6 nm and 12 nm, respectively [19].
depending on the material, ion species, and irradiation condition.                        Note that the dominant radiation damage to the microstructure
The work on helium-irradiated Mo indicates that the development                           of a nuclear fuel is generated by high energy ﬁssion products since
of a GBS occurs between the irradiation temperatures of 0.15Tm                           an average of 169 MeV is released as the kinetic energy of the
and 0.35Tm (Tm the melting point) [13]. For Mo the melting tem-                           daughter nuclei from each ﬁssion event. Despite the range of sev-
perature and the corresponding irradiation temperature window                             eral lm for ﬁssion products including Xe and Kr, a GBS develops
are 2623 °C and 161–741 °C, respectively. GBS formation of Xe                             under extremely aggressive irradiation and violent dynamic condi-
bubbles from Xe ion irradiation has not been reported in the open                         tions with signiﬁcant amount of atomic displacements, Xe precip-
literature. The development of a 3-dimensional highly-ordered                             itation, and re-solution of Xe back to the U–Mo matrix. It is a great
GBS consisting of mostly Xe (e.g., Xe/Kr  10) in the U–vMo                               challenge, from both experiment and modeling aspects, to capture
(v = 7–10) fuels irradiated in reactors was discovered in recent                          the complete processes of GBS nucleation, growth, and collapse in
years using TEM in post-irradiation examination [16–19]. The typi-                        irradiated U–Mo fuel. The stability of the GBS in U–Mo fuel under
cal fuel plate centerline temperature under irradiation in a                              extremely harsh irradiation conditions from low to intermediate
research or test reactor is in the range of 90–150 °C. At a relatively                    ﬁssion density is believed to be largely responsible for its excep-
low ﬁssion density of 1.41  1021 ﬁssions/cm3, a GBS already                              tional fuel performance in geometrical stability, mechanical integ-
developed with an average size of 2 nm. At an intermediate ﬁs-                           rity and ﬁssion gas retention.
sion density of 3.3  1021 ﬁssions/cm3, the GBS is identiﬁed to have                          Equally important to the radiation stability of a GBS in the U–
an fcc structure in the bcc host material of U–7Mo with an average                        Mo fuel is its thermal stability. Although U–Mo fuel plate operation
                                                                                          temperature for research and test reactors is limited to be below
 ⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 (208) 533 7385; fax: +1 (208) 533 7863.                 250 °C due to corrosion of Al alloy cladding in the coolant, the ther-
    E-mail address: Jian.Gan@inl.gov (J. Gan).                                            mal annealing study on the irradiated fuel may provide insight to a

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnucmat.2015.04.023
0022-3115/Ó 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
2                                                          J. Gan et al. / Journal of Nuclear Materials 464 (2015) 1–5


better understanding of the U–Mo fuel performance as well as to
its potential to be used as an alternative fuel for other types of
reactors at higher temperature. On the other hand, the microstruc-
tural stability of U–Mo fuel itself is controlled by the c-phase (bcc)
stability. There is a great interest in investigating the thermal sta-
bility of the GBS in relation to U–Mo c-phase stability. In-situ heat-
ing TEM is a popular technique to investigate the dynamic
response of the microstructure or chemical process as a function
of temperature [20–26]. It allows tracking the thermal stability
of microstructural features such as defect clusters, bubbles, loops,
precipitates, dislocation, and grain boundary down to nanometer
scale. The objective of this work is to investigate the thermal stabil-
ity of the GBS under in-situ heating to see if there is a threshold
temperature where the GBS starts to collapse.
                                                                                              Fig. 2. Temperature vs. elapsed time during TEM in-situ heating experiment.


2. Experiment
                                                                                           3. Results and discussions
   A thermal stability study of the GBS was conducted using a
Gatan double-tilt TEM heating holder (Model 652-Ta) on a TEM                                   The GBS microstructure was monitored during an in-situ heat-
sample prepared from an irradiated U–10Mo/Al monolithic fuel                               ing experiment under bright ﬁeld imaging conditions at zone
plate (L1F040) using an FEI Quanta 3D dual-beam FIB system.                                [1 1 0]. GBS images were recorded at various points of the heating
The local ﬁssion density and irradiation temperature is estimated                          experiment as a function of time and temperature for evaluation
to be 3.5  1021 ﬁssions/cm3 and 140 °C, respectively. A JEOL-                            of its thermal stability as shown in Fig. 3. At high temperature,
2010 TEM/STEM 200 kV microscope, with a LaB6 ﬁlament and a                                 the specimen was kept at a relatively constant temperature of
Gatan UltraScan 1000 digital camera, was used. The experimental                            700 °C for approximately 34 min, and multiple TEM images were
setup is illustrated in Fig. 1. The Gatan heating holder has a type-                       taken at different times as shown in Fig. 4. Note that the images
R thermocouple spot-welded to the miniature furnace body to                                on the left and right are taken from the area close to zone [1 1 0],
sense the furnace temperature. The actual temperature of the                               while the two images in the middle are taken from an adjacent
specimen in a heating holder tends to be lower than the measured                           area close to zone [1 2 1]. The heating current was turned off after
furnace temperature. This is because heat transfer under vacuum is                         reaching approximately 850 °C, and the sample temperature
mainly by conduction; therefore, the specimen temperature is con-                          quickly returned to room temperature.
trolled by the uncertain quality of the mechanical contact between                             Fig. 5 shows a comparison of GBS images at zone [1 1 0] taken at
the furnace and the specimen. However, at high temperature, it is                          room temperature before and after the in-situ heating experiment.
anticipated that the difference between the thermocouple reading                           There is no signiﬁcant change in GBS lattice constant and bubble
and actual temperature on the specimen tends to diminish since                             size. The slight difference between the two images is likely caused
heat transfer by thermal radiation starts to predominate.                                  by small deviation in the imaging condition.
   The temperature ramp rate was approximately 10 °C/min                                       The images shown in Figs. 3–5 demonstrate the high thermal
before reaching 700 °C. The heating holder temperature was                                stability of the GBS in irradiated U–10Mo fuel up to 850 °C.
raised from room temperature to 700 °C in about 90 min, kept at                            Bubble migration and coalescence were not observed during the
700 °C for approximately 34 min, and further increased to                                  heating experiment. No evidence was found for the development
850 °C at a reduced ramp rate of 5 °C/min. The temperature                               of large bubbles or shrinkage of GBS bubbles. The fcc structure of
vs. elapsed time is shown in Fig. 2. During the in-situ heating                            the Xe GBS in U–Mo, developed at an irradiation temperature of
experiment, the TEM column pressure is in the range of (0.65–                              140 °C (Tirr), remains stable at the highest heating temperature of
1.5)  10 5 Pa, depending on the temperature. As a result of ther-                         850 °C (Tht). Since the melting point of U–10Mo is approximately
mal drifting, Cu grid softening and ﬁnger sagging, and thermal                             1175 °C, estimated from the U–Mo phase diagram [27], the
expansion under heating, frequent adjustments of the specimen                              corresponding homologous temperature for irradiation and the
z-height and tilt are necessary to maintain the GBS image clarity                          highest heating temperature is 0.29Tm and 0.78Tm, respectively.
under the right imaging condition for the same area of a TEM sam-                          Note that the irradiation temperature for the GBS in U–Mo is in
ple. Note that the entire FIB-TEM sample is about 10  15 lm2 in                           good agreement with the temperature windows for GBS formation
size.                                                                                      identiﬁed from He ion irradiated Mo (Tirr/Tm = 0.15–0.35) [13]. The




Fig. 1. Illustration of TEM in-situ heating experiment showing heating holder (left), a schematic of FIB-TEM Cu grid on the heating holder (center), and a magniﬁed view of the
FIB-TEM specimen of the irradiated U–10Mo fuel mounted on the Cu grid ﬁnger-D (right).
                                                          J. Gan et al. / Journal of Nuclear Materials 464 (2015) 1–5                                                      3




       Fig. 3. TEM bright ﬁeld images of ﬁssion gas bubble superlattice in irradiated U–10Mo fuel at zone [1 1 0] at the temperature of 199, 400, 603, and 793 °C.




Fig. 4. TEM bright ﬁeld images of gas bubble superlattice in irradiated U–10Mo fuel kept at a temperature of 704 °C for approximately 34 min. Pictures on the left and right
are taken close to zone [1 1 0], and the two pictures in the middle are taken from an adjacent area close to zone [1 2 1].




Fig. 5. TEM bright ﬁeld images of gas bubble superlattice at zone [1 1 0] at room temperature before and after TEM in-situ heating experiment up to 850 °C. The scale bar is
20 nm.



observed high thermal stability of the Xe GBS up to an annealing                          (0.67Tm). Weber et al. reported on the effect of a 30-min annealing
temperature of 0.78Tm was a surprise. It is speculated that helium                        on the Xe distribution proﬁle in polycrystalline Al irradiated with
GBS in irradiated Mo may not survive at an annealing temperature                          Xe ions at room temperature [29]. They found that Xe is immobile
of 0.78Tm. Yun et al. found that strain energy in UO2 for Xe is much                      at annealing temperatures below 260 °C (0.57Tm) and becomes
larger than that of He as a result of a large difference in atomic                        highly mobile at a temperature of 290 °C (0.60Tm). The high ther-
radius (2.15 Å for Xe vs. 0.3 Å for He) [28]. Therefore, it is antici-                    mal stability of the Xe GBS demonstrated by annealing at
pated that, for an insoluble noble gas atom, Xe mobility shall be                         700 °C (0.67Tm) in this work may be related to the reduced Xe
much lower than that of He in metal as well. The low mobility of                          mobility in the irradiated U–10Mo fuel due to solid ﬁssion prod-
Xe in U–Mo fuel may contribute to the observed high thermal sta-                          ucts (SFP) in solution. Since no SFP precipitates were found in
bility of the Xe GBS.                                                                     the U–Mo matrix ﬁlled with GBS, it is speculated that the SFP at
    After annealing at a temperature of approximately 700 °C for                          high concentration, while kept in solution in U–Mo fuel, create a
34 min, there is no signiﬁcant change of the GBS as shown in                              large strain ﬁeld that may signiﬁcantly increase the diffusion bar-
Fig. 4. It appears that the mobility of Xe in the irradiated U–                           rier for Xe compared to ion irradiation without SFP.
10Mo remains low, even at this high annealing temperature
4                                                     J. Gan et al. / Journal of Nuclear Materials 464 (2015) 1–5


    The GBS images, acquired at room temperature before and after                     4. Conclusions
the in-situ heating experiment, demonstrate the high thermal sta-
bility of the GBS. The high radiation stability of the GBS is apparent                    In U–Mo fuels with Al alloy matrix or cladding, if the diffusion
since it was developed in the U–Mo fuel under very aggressive                         reaction between the U–Mo and Al can be suppressed, the result
bombardment from ﬁssion fragments (90 MeV) to very high                              from in-situ heating TEM of an irradiated U–10Mo fuel demon-
atomic displacement damage. With respect to the thermal stability                     strates the extraordinary thermal stability of the ﬁssion GBS con-
of the c-phase U–Mo (bcc), the temperature–transformation–time                        sisting of mostly xenon atoms. No signiﬁcant changes in the
(TTT) diagram shown in Fig. 6 indicates that for U–10Mo it may                        bubble superlattice could be identiﬁed after the specimen was kept
take up to 5 h to start decomposing its c-phase at 500 °C. Once                       at a temperature of 700 °C for 34 min. The c phase (bcc) of U–
passing 580 °C, the U–10Mo will be stable in its high temperature                     10Mo appears stable after exposure to a high temperature (500–
c-phase (bcc). A logical question is: Will GBS collapse once c-phase                  846 °C) for an accumulated time of 80 min. The U–Mo fuel has
becomes decomposed? To better understand the correlation                              the potential to be used at irradiation temperatures higher than
between the c-phase stability and the GBS stability in irradiated                     that of U–Mo fuels in the research and test reactors.
U–Mo fuel, it is desired to conduct an in-situ heating TEM experi-
ment on irradiated U–7Mo fuel instead of the U–10Mo fuel since
                                                                                      US Department of Energy Disclaimer
the former may start the phase transformation in 1 h at 525 °C,
which is much sooner than U–10Mo fuel at 500 °C (6 h). Note
                                                                                         This information was prepared as an account of work sponsored
that although GBS has a high thermal stability, the overall stability
                                                                                      by an agency of the U.S. Government. Neither the U.S. Government
of GBS in irradiated U–Mo fuel may be strongly inﬂuenced by the
                                                                                      nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any
interaction between the U–Mo and Al matrix for dispersion fuels
                                                                                      warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or
or Al cladding for monolithic fuels at much lower irradiation
                                                                                      responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of
temperatures.
                                                                                      any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or repre-
    It is important to keep in mind that the high thermal stability of
                                                                                      sents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.
the Xe GBS in irradiated U–10Mo heating up to 0.78Tm does not
                                                                                      References herein to any speciﬁc commercial product, process, or
imply that the development of GBS can occur at this high irradia-
                                                                                      service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise,
tion temperature. However, if the GBS is not stable at a given
                                                                                      does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recom-
annealing temperature, the GBS development is most probably
                                                                                      mendation, or favoring by the U.S. Government or any agency
not feasible at that temperature under irradiation. It is well known
                                                                                      thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do
that U–10Mo oxidizes quickly in air, even at room temperature. In
                                                                                      not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the U.S. Government or
addition to the possible effect of SFP in solution on suppressing Xe
                                                                                      any agency thereof.
mobility in irradiated U–Mo, the surface oxide formed on both
sides of a FIB-TEM sample is speculated to reduce the surface sink
                                                                                      Acknowledgments
strength and prevent Xe loss from the near surface region. This
may compensate the effect of preferential loss of Xe and small
                                                                                         Many thanks to Francine Rice for her assistance on the experi-
defect clusters to the surface under heating due to the large surface
                                                                                      ment and James Madden for FIB-TEM sample preparation. This
to volume ratio for a TEM sample. As a general concern for the in-
                                                                                      work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of
situ heating TEM particularly for a FIB-TEM sample, the small sam-
                                                                                      Nuclear Materials Threat Reduction (NA-212), National Nuclear
ple dimension plus the technical difﬁculty in verifying the FIB-TEM
                                                                                      Security Administration, under DOE-NE Idaho Operations Ofﬁce
specimen temperature for the TEM heating holder, the observation
                                                                                      Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517. This manuscript was authored by
from this work needs to be veriﬁed by a furnace annealing experi-
                                                                                      a contractor for the U.S. Government. The publisher, by accepting
ment of a bulk irradiated fuel sample followed by TEM character-
                                                                                      the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S.
ization. This work has been planned, and the results will be
                                                                                      Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-
provided in a future publication or conference.
                                                                                      wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this
                                                                                      manuscript, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.

                                                                                      References

                                                                                       [1] S.L. Sass, B.L. Eyre, Phil. Mag. 27 (1973) 1447.
                                                                                       [2] P.B. Johnson, D.J. Mazey, Nature 276 (1978) 595.
                                                                                       [3] P.B. Johnson, D.J. Mazey, J. Nucl. Mater. 93–94 (1980) 721.
                                                                                       [4] W. Jager, J. Roth, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 182–183 (1981) 975.
                                                                                       [5] P.B. Johnson, D.J. Mazey, J. Nucl. Mater. 111–112 (1982) 681.
                                                                                       [6] H. Van Swijgenhoven, G. Knuyt, J. Vanoppen, L.M. Stals, J. Nucl. Mater. 114
                                                                                           (1983) 157.
                                                                                       [7] D.J. Mazey, J.H. Evans, J. Nucl. Mater. 138 (1986) 16.
                                                                                       [8] J.H. Evans, D.J. Mazey, J. Nucl. Mater. 138 (1986) 176.
                                                                                       [9] P.B. Johnson, A.L. Malcolm, D.J. Mazey, J. Nucl. Mater. 152 (1988) 69.
                                                                                      [10] P.B. Johnson, A.L. Diprose, D.J. Mazey, J. Nucl. Mater. 158 (1988) 108.
                                                                                      [11] P.B. Johnson, Bubble lattices in metals, in: J.H. Evans, S.E. Donnelly (Eds.),
                                                                                           Fundamental Aspects of Inert Gases in Solids, Plenum, New York, 1991, p. 167.
                                                                                      [12] P.B. Johnson, K.L. Reader, R.W. Thomson, J. Nucl. Mater. 231 (1996) 92.
                                                                                      [13] F.E. Lawson, P.B. Johnson, J. Nucl. Mater. 252 (1998) 34.
                                                                                      [14] P.B. Johnson, F. Lawson, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. B 243 (2006) 325.
                                                                                      [15] N.M. Ghoniem, D. Walgraef, S.J. Zinkle, J. Comput. Aided Mater. Des. 8 (2002)
                                                                                           1–38.
                                                                                      [16] S. Van den Berghe, W. Van Renterghem, A. Leenaers, J. Nucl. Mater. 375 (2008)
                                                                                           340–346.
                                                                                      [17] J. Gan, D.D. Keiser Jr., D.M. Wachs, A.B. Robinson, B.D. Miller, T.R. Allen, J. Nucl.
                                                                                           Mater. 396 (2010) 234–239.
                                                                                      [18] J. Gan, D.D. Keiser Jr., B.D. Miller, A.B. Robinson, J.F. Jue, P. Medvedev, D.M.
Fig. 6. Time–temperature–transformation diagram of U–10Mo alloy (after [30]).              Wachs, J. Nucl. Mater. 424 (2012) 43–50.
                                                                 J. Gan et al. / Journal of Nuclear Materials 464 (2015) 1–5                                                        5


[19] J. Gan, B.D. Miller, D.D. Keiser Jr., A.B. Robinson, J.W. Madden, P. Medvedev,              [25] N. Dalili, P. Li, M. Kupsta, Q. Liu, D.G. Ivey, Micron 58 (2014) 25–31.
     D.M. Wachs, J. Nucl. Mater. 454 (2014) 434–445.                                             [26] A.M. Thron, P. Greene, K. Liu, K. van Benthem, Ultramicroscopy 137 (2014) 55–
[20] J.W. Kim, J.-P. Ahn, D.H. Kim, H.-S. Chung, J.-H. Shim, Y.W. Cho, K.H. Oh, Scripta               65.
     Mater. 62 (2010) 701.                                                                       [27] Okamoto H., ASM International, Alloy Phase Diagram Section, Diagram #
[21] R. Sharma, Micron 43 (2012) 1147–1155.                                                           901671, Binary Alloy Phase Diagrams, II Ed., Ed. T.B. Massalski, Materials Park,
[22] D. Kiener, Z. Zhang, S. Sturm, S. Cazottes, P.J. Imrich, C. Kirchlechner, G. Dehm,               Ohio, U.S.A.
     Phil. Mag. 92 (25–27) (2012) 3269–3289.                                                     [28] Y. Yun, O. Eriksson, P.M. Oppeneer, H. Kim, K. Park, J. Nucl. Mater. 385 (2009)
[23] S.L. Shrestha, K.Y. Xie, S.P. Ringer, K.R. Carpenter, D.R. Smith, C.R. Killmore, J.M.            364–367.
     Cairney, Scripta Mater. 69 (2013) 481–484.                                                  [29] T. Weber, K.-P. Lieb, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res B44 (1989) 54–60.
[24] S.J. Yoo, C.-Y. Kim, J.W. Shin, S.-G. Lee, J.-M. Jeong, Y.-J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J.-G. Kim,    [30] P.E. Repas, R.H. Goodenow, R.F. Hehemann, Trans. ASM 57 (1964) 150–163.
     Mater. Charact. 78 (2013) 31–36.
